[//]: # (title: Heroku)

<show-structure for="chapter" depth="2"/>

<link-summary>Learn how to prepare and deploy a Ktor application to Heroku.</link-summary>

In this tutorial, you will learn how to prepare and deploy a Ktor application to Heroku.

## Prerequisites {id="prerequisites"}

Before starting this tutorial, ensure that the following prerequisites are met:
* You have a Heroku account.
* [Heroku CLI](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/heroku-cli) is installed on your machine.


## Create a sample application {id="create-sample-app"}

Create a sample application as described in [](server-create-a-new-project.topic).

> Ktor provides two approaches to [create and configure a server](server-create-and-configure.topic): in code
> or in a configuration file. The only difference in deployment is how you [specify a port](#port) used to listen
> for incoming requests.
> 
{style="note"}


## Prepare the application {id="prepare-app"}

### Step 1: Configure a port {id="port"}

First, specify a port to listen for incoming requests. Since Heroku uses the `PORT` environment variable, you need to
configure your application to use the value of this variable. Depending on the way used to [configure a Ktor server](server-create-and-configure.topic),
do one of the following:
* If server configuration is specified in code, you can retrieve the environment variable value using `System.getenv`. 
  Open the <path>Application.kt</path> file placed in the <path>src/main/kotlin/com/example</path> folder and change the
  `port` parameter value of the `embeddedServer()` function:

   ```kotlin
   fun main() {
      embeddedServer(Netty, port = System.getenv("PORT")?.toIntOrNull() ?: 8080) {
          // ...
      }.start(wait = true)
   }
    ```

* If your server configuration is specified in an <path>application.conf</path> file, you can assign the environment
  variable to the `port` parameter by using the `${ENV}` syntax. Open the <path>application.conf</path> file placed in 
  <path>src/main/resources</path> and update it as shown below:

   ```
   ktor {
       deployment {
           port = 8080
           port = ${?PORT}
       }
   }
   ```

### Step 2: Add a stage task {id="stage"}

Open the <path>build.gradle.kts</path> file and add a custom `stage` task. Heroku uses the `stage` task to make an executable
file that runs on Heroku's platform:

```kotlin
tasks {
    create("stage").dependsOn("installDist")
}
``` 

> The `installDist` task comes with the Gradle [application plugin](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/application_plugin.html),
> which is already added to the sample project.
>
{style="note"}

### Step 3: Create a Procfile {id="procfile"}

Create a [Procfile](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/procfile) in a project root and add the following content to it:

```
web: ./build/install/ktor-get-started-sample/bin/ktor-get-started-sample
```

This file specifies a path to the application's executable generated by the [`stage`](#stage) task and allows Heroku to start the application.
You might need to replace `ktor-get-started-sample` with your project name.

### Step 4: Specify the Java version (optional) {id="java-version"}

By default, Heroku uses Java 25 to run your application. If your Ktor application is compiled with a different Java version,
you need to specify it explicitly to avoid deployment failures.

To specify the Java version, create a <path>system.properties</path> file in your project's root folder with the following content:

```bash
java.runtime.version=21
```

Replace `21` with your desired Java version.

> For more information, see [Heroku's documentation on specifying a Java version](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/java-support#specifying-a-java-version).
>
{style="tip"}

## Deploy an application {id="deploy-app"}

To deploy your application to Heroku using Git, open a new terminal window and follow the steps below:

1. Commit changes made in the [previous section](#prepare-app) locally:
   ```Bash
   git add .
   git commit -m "Prepare app for deploying"
   ```
2. Login to Heroku CLI:
   ```Bash
   heroku login
   ```
3. Create a Heroku application using the `heroku create` command.
   Replace `ktor-sample-heroku` with the name of your application:
   ```Bash
   heroku create ktor-sample-heroku
   ```
   This command does two things:
   * Creates a new Heroku application, which is available on the [web dashboard](https://dashboard.heroku.com/apps/).
   * Adds a new Git remote called `heroku` to a local repository.

4. To deploy the application, push changes to `heroku main`:
   ```Bash
   git push heroku main
   ```
5. Wait until Heroku builds and publishes the application. When it completes, you should see the following output:
   ```bash
   ...
   remote: https://ktor-sample-heroku.herokuapp.com/ deployed to Heroku
   remote:
   remote: Verifying deploy... done.
   ```

